Title 
 SOCIOLEGAL FRAMEWORKS FOR THE FIGITAL AGE 
Authors
Elizabeth Renieris, Katryna Dow, Philip Sheldrake, Mitzi László
Audience
crypto (NB: the risks of throwing the baby out with the bathwater) and rebooting the web engineers (NB: why it matters to those building)
Purpose
Communicate the interaction between the ethics/ socio-legal and the technical 
Enable the technical solutions to become usable by a wide audience 
Constrain the technology with a pre-mortem 
Structure
Background/Problem Statement/ What’s Broken? 
Hypothesis
Body/Proposed Solution 
Conclusion/Vision

 


In response to the diminishing trust in traditional institutions to tackle todays concerns there has been a rise of distributed ledgers and self-sovereign solutions designed to empower citizens and provide the technological means for more equity for the use of data and identity. However, in order for these technologies to be adopted by society at large it will be necessary to bridge the technology to the existing social structures in particular to be trusted by non-engineers. 
The Edges of Physical and Digital
There has been an increasing effort to capture the human in a digital medium. The data attached to a human is being assembled to represent the physical. Phigital (https://medium.com/spark-eighteen-lifestyle/going-phigital-in-2018-merging-physical-and-digital-c6340f4ed450) is the blurring of the physical and the digital. 
 
However, in order for these technologies to be adopted there is a significant gap between the current legal and jurisdictional frameworks to enable such technologies to be adopted and scape the purpose of this paper is to identifiy and close these gaps such that the technologies being developed through RWoT are both implementable, scalable and can be commercialized.
The Edges of Self and the Commons 
Who should control the light that is reflected off a face? Who should control the air that we breath? There are data points that we share. There is a fluffy edge between the ‘I’ and the ‘we’ that falls into the unknown. [MAYBE INSERT P SHELDRAKE’S INTERPERSONAL DATA]
Pure Code Application 
Human nature is imperfect and collaboration is a living process. Using code 

Distinguish between tool and application of the tool. Assigning meaning 

French philosopher “the minute you invent the ship you invent the ship wreck” 

Impulse to codify everything is not neutral and is a danger. 

Neuroscience is a form of coding your personality and interactions. 

Who decides? 

Culture as a tool for adaptation. 

Even if we could program the individual, you have to program culture. 

We already have a programmed set of rules in culture. 

Recognition that we have these things  (rules) and they vary from culture to culture. If you live your culture, what are you doing with that life? 

You can live in splendid isolation, that’s ok. But what if you are living with others? Then you have transactions. Need to define the give and the get otherwise you are unlikely to commit. You must value what you get more than what you give. Can be net positive because there is a difference of opinion of value. True altruism. Net value and acceptable risk. 

Get to decide the argument on what you decide to commit. Can be fuzzy logic rather than a mathematical logic. Need to be able to define your own rules. Who would I trust if the information was provided (data)? Need assurance about who it came from, it hasn’t been modified in transit. 

Accessibility of the law as well as technology.  
Pre Mortem 


Legal Map 
⁃	Where is the overlap?
	There isn’t much overlap. In general, we have “data-specific laws & regulations” and non-data-specific laws & regulations. We don’t have laws/legal regimes that overlap.  

⁃	Where is the gap?
The gap is in where the physical meets the digital (i.e. the “phyigital”) esp. in respect of humans/shared humanity. The human digital twin is different. WEF has said they want to apply the same legal frameworks to the digital twin of a physical object/asset but humans are not like other physical objects/assets. 

⁃	How to close the gap to preserve humanity and promote human dignity?
We need a unique framework but what? Digital bill of rights? Drawing the lines/borders around what/where? 

We struggle to even understand our own disciplines; how can we be ready to commit our complex humanity to one approach/framework? 

 


Preamble on what we could be doing here:
* What is a computer?
* Data by itself has no meaning
* If it's about property, then property law applies. If it's a cryptocurrency, then security law etc.
* One framework cannot cover all applications of extant law
* We have a history of rejecting laws to accommodate new technologies (e.g. law for the car), but each technological leap forward has been accompanied by extensions of existing corpus of law
* CA instigated a 'right to wifi' for inclusivity purposes
* Rights and contract law are in conflict
* The US and Europe are party to the UDHR and ICCPR
* We have to respect the individual and recognise that data does not pivot entirely around the atomistic individual
* Both/and, not either/or 
* Looking back at paper - when we introduced paper, we "paperized" things like money, ideas, art, property (e.g. deeds), etc. and when we look at data, we have a similar phenomenon around "digitizing" things into data; what we never did with paper was we never "paperized" the human; we are digitizing the human (merging the human and the data/digital)
* Take the example of the post - right to privacy prevents government interference/intrusions (e.g. opening your mail) but we allow this kind of thing by commercial actors (e.g. Gmail reads your email) because we are applying the wrong legal framework - we are applying contract law to Google (and this activity doesn't violate their terms of service)but we apply civil/political/human rights to government interference/instrusions; we need to extend this kind of framework/protections to interferences by the private sector 
* We formed companies to recognise a new collective form ... do we need a similar approach here to these collectivities ([wei](https://akasha.org/blog/2019/01/17/interpersonal-data-1-of-3))? Perhaps not, given the fact that they are infinite in number, lasting perhaps a millisecond or a century.
* something has to be left in the public domain; we cannot propertize everything
* digital component parts are not subject to the same checks & balances 
* The liability has to go somewhere - we have to allocate liability in the digital supply chain; cannot just have Ts&Cs that absolve all actors in digital ecosystem from liability
 
exception in the GDPR (and other legislation) about exception for public research/ scientific historical research - using metric data for public research 
 
Posting of a digital letter
 
getting on a bus 
 
sitting in a restaurant/ if you pay for the meal (surveillance act) then can you be recorded. 
 
 
Laws apply. Phigital exceptionalism.
 
Explain why the digital is the same as the physical. 
 
Contract law cannot override – consent does not work for everything, you cannot consent to selling your child and it be valid.
 
Car going on the road. BMW could have facebook like terms and conditions. A car cannot go on the road without passing through various checks. The purchase certain goods there are a range of laws, US import safety/ safely on the road, the manufacturing of the parts there are so many checks and balances. Part of the problem is that agile idea to terms and conditions, component parts in I  are not being subjected to the same quality control/ value chain assessment. 
 
Digital gangsters are trying to not call themselves what they are. Control without responsibility. Publishing. Section 2 38. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

